DOCS-3198: offline data pipelines, SDK docs, hot data store fixes (#4440)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/data-ai/data/data-pipelines.md

    Schedule: "0 * * * *", // Run hourly
})
```

To query your hot data store, set your query's `data_source` field to `TabularDataSourceType.TABULAR_DATA_SOURCE_TYPE_HOT_STORAGE`.

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="TypeScript" %}}

To define a new pipeline, call [`dataClient.CreateDataPipeline`](/dev/reference/apis/data-client/#createdatapipeline):

```typescript
const apiKey = "<api-key>";
const apiKeyID = "<api-key-id>";

const client = await createViamClient({
  credential: {
    type: "api-key",
    payload: { key: apiKey, keyId: apiKeyID },
  },
});

const dataClient = client.dataClient;

const pipeline = [
  BSON.serialize({ $match: { component_name: "temperature-sensor" } }),
  BSON.serialize({
    $group: {
      location: "$location_id",
      avg_temp: { $avg: "$data.readings.temperature" },
      count: { $sum: 1 },
    },
  }),
];

const response = await dataClient.createDataPipeline({
  organizationId: "<org-id>",
  name: "hourly-temp-average",
  mqlBinary: pipeline,
  schedule: "0 * * * *", // Run hourly
});
```

To query your hot data store, set your query's `dataSource` field to `TabularDataSourceType.TABULAR_DATA_SOURCE_TYPE_HOT_STORAGE`.

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

> To create a pipeline that reads data from the [hot data store](/data-ai/data/hot-data-store/), specify a `dataSourceType` in your pipeline configuration.

Author: ah, nice catch. I should have removed this when I added the SDK-specific lines. And this was _already_ redundant when the CLI tab was selected.

Removed this line, but stole the introductory clause and repurposed it at the end of each tab.

    Name: "updated-name",
    MqlBinary: pipeline,
    Schedule: "0 * * * *",
})
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### Enable a pipeline

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="CLI" %}}

Use [`datapipelines enable`](/dev/tools/cli/#datapipelines) to enable a disabled data pipeline:

```sh {class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
viam datapipelines enable --id=<pipeline-id>
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Go" %}}

Use [`DataClient.EnableDataPipeline`](https://pkg.go.dev/go.viam.com/rdk/app#DataClient.EnableDataPipeline) to enable a disabled data pipeline:

```go
client, err := utils.NewViamClient(context.Background(), utils.WithAPIKey("<api-key>", "<api-key-id>"))
if err != nil {
    panic(err)
}
defer client.Close()

dataClient := client.DataClient()

_, err := dataClient.EnableDataPipeline(context.Background(), &datapb.EnableDataPipelineRequest{
    Id: "<pipeline-id>",
})
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### Disable a pipeline

Disabling a data pipeline lets you pause data pipeline execution without fully deleting the pipeline configuration from your organization.
The pipeline immediately stops aggregating data.
You can re-enable the pipeline at any time to resume execution.

> Viam won't backfill missed time windows from the period of time when a pipeline was disabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a pipeline is re-enabled, Viam will not backfill missed time windows from the period of time when a pipeline was disabled.
```

---
linkTitle: "Aggregate data automatically"
title: "Aggregate data automatically"
weight: 25
description: "Make processed data automatically available for faster, simpler queries."
type: "docs"
tags: ["data pipelines", "aggregation", "materialized views"]
icon: true
images: ["/services/icons/data-capture.svg"]
viamresources: ["sensor", "data_manager"]
platformarea: ["data", "cli"]
date: "2025-07-02"
---

Data pipelines automatically transform raw sensor readings into summaries and insights at a schedule that you choose.
Viam stores the output of these pipelines in a cache so that you can access complex aggregation results more efficiently.
When late-arriving data syncs to Viam, pipelines automatically re-run to keep summaries accurate.

> For example, you could use a data pipeline to pre-calculate results like "average temperature per hour".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, you could use a data pipeline to pre-calculate results like "average temperature per hour."
```
or better yet
```suggestion
For example, you could use a data pipeline to pre-calculate results such as average temperature per hour.
```

Author: Reworded

If you query that information frequently, this can save significant computational resources.

## Prerequisites

Before creating a data pipeline, you must enable data capture from at least one component and begin syncing data with Viam.

Only users with organization owner permissions can create a data pipeline.

## Pipeline management

> ### Create a pipeline

Author: How soon? Happy to hold off for a couple of days and add the documentation here, but if it'll be longer than that, it might be best to handle this in a follow-up PR.

To define a data pipeline, specify a name, organization, schedule, data source type, and query:

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="CLI" %}}

Use [`datapipelines create`](/dev/tools/cli/#datapipelines) to create your pipeline:

```sh {class="command-line" data-prompt="$" class="command-line" data-continuation-prompt="2-5"}
viam datapipelines create \
  --org-id=<org-id> \
  --name=sensor-counts \
  --schedule="0 * * * *" \
  --data-source-type="standard" \
  --mql='[{"$match": {"component_name": "sensor"}}, {"$group": {"_id": "$location_id", "avg": {"$avg": "$data.readings.value"}}}]'
```

To pass your query from a file instead of from inline MQL, pass the `--mql-path` flag instead of `--mql`.

> To query data from the [hot data store](/data-ai/data/hot-data-store/), specify `--data-source-type hotstorage`.

Reviewer 3: Are we going to define this for the various language examples below?

Author: Added, good call.

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Python" %}}

Use [`DataClient.CreateDataPipeline`](/dev/reference/apis/data-client/#createdatapipeline) to define a new pipeline:

```python
data_client = DataClient.from_api_key(
    api_key="<api-key>",
    api_key_id="<api-key-id>"
)

request = data_client.create_data_pipeline(
    organization_id="<org-id>",
    name="hourly-temp-average",
    mql_binary=[
        bson.encode({"$match": {"component_name": "temperature-sensor"}}),
        bson.encode({
            "$group": {

>                 "_id": "$location_id",

Reviewer 3: Do not do this. In fact, I think we should probably call out that you should not specify an id if your last stage is a group stage unless the id is guaranteed to be unique for every pipeline run. Otherwise there will be duplicate id errors, and only the first pipeline result will save successfully

Author: Excellent catch, I'll change this and add a warning.

})
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="TypeScript" %}}

Use [`dataClient.CreateDataPipeline`](/dev/reference/apis/data-client/#createdatapipeline) to define a new pipeline:

```typescript
const apiKey = "<api-key>";
const apiKeyID = "<api-key-id>";

const client = await createViamClient({
  credential: {
    type: "api-key",
    payload: { key: apiKey, keyId: apiKeyID },
  },
});

const dataClient = client.dataClient;

const pipeline = [
  BSON.serialize({ $match: { component_name: "temperature-sensor" } }),
  BSON.serialize({
    $group: {
      _id: "$location_id",
      avg_temp: { $avg: "$data.readings.temperature" },
      count: { $sum: 1 },
    },
  }),
];

const response = await dataClient.createDataPipeline({
  organizationId: "<org-id>",
  name: "hourly-temp-average",
  mqlBinary: pipeline,
  schedule: "0 * * * *", // Run hourly
});
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

To create a pipeline that reads data from the [hot data store](/data-ai/data/hot-data-store/), specify a `dataSourceType` in your pipeline configuration.

#### Schedule format

To create a schedule for your pipeline, specify a [cron expression](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cron) in UTC.

> The schedule determines both execution frequency and input time window.

Reviewer 3: Will readers know what "input time window means"?

Author: Good point, changed to 'query time range' to make this easier to grok. If you still think that's confusing, I can add a more in-depth explanation.

The following table contains some common schedules, which correspond to the listed execution frequencies and input time windows:

| Schedule       | Frequency        | Time Window         |
| -------------- | ---------------- | ------------------- |
| `0 * * * *`    | Hourly           | Previous hour       |
| `0 0 * * *`    | Daily            | Previous day        |
| `*/15 * * * *` | Every 15 minutes | Previous 15 minutes |

### List pipelines

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="CLI" %}}

> Use [`datapipelines list`](/dev/tools/cli/#datapipelines) to see a summary of all pipelines in an organization:

Reviewer 3: It's a list of pipeline configs

    panic(err)
}
defer client.Close()

dataClient := client.DataClient()

resp, err := dataClient.ListDataPipelines(context.Background(), &datapb.ListDataPipelinesRequest{
    OrganizationId: "<org-id>",
})

for _, pipeline := range resp.DataPipelines {
    fmt.Printf("%s (id: %s)\n", pipeline.Name, pipeline.Id)
    fmt.Printf("Schedule: %s\n", pipeline.Schedule)
    fmt.Printf("Enabled: %v\n", pipeline.Enabled)
}
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="TypeScript" %}}

Use [`dataClient.ListDataPipelines`](/dev/reference/apis/data-client/#listdatapipelines) to fetch a summary of all pipelines in an organization:

```typescript
const apiKey = "<api-key>";
const apiKeyID = "<api-key-id>";

const client = await createViamClient({
  credential: {
    type: "api-key",
    payload: { key: apiKey, keyId: apiKeyID },
  },
});

const dataClient = client.dataClient;

const response = await dataClient.listDataPipelines({
  organizationId: "<org-id>",
});

response.dataPipelines.forEach((pipeline) => {
  console.log(`${pipeline.name} (id: ${pipeline.id})`);
  console.log(`Schedule: ${pipeline.schedule}`);
  console.log(`Enabled: ${pipeline.enabled}`);
});
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

> ### Update a pipeline

Reviewer 3: I'm tempted to not include this in the documentation. We don't want people changing pipeline schedules or queries after a pipeline has started inserting query results. Might end up just being the name that we allow them to update. Is it ok to leave this out?

Author: FYI, it'll still be in the SDK docs unless we manually hide it from each SDK. If we think it's dangerous for users to edit existing pipeline queries or schedules, we should either:

- not provide that functionality
- warn users about the dangers

So I would strongly prefer to keep documentation in place, with a warning explaining the danger, unless we decide to remove that functionality. Otherwise users will still wind up using the API and Ask AI will scrape the SDK doc and recommend using the method anyway, just without any warnings.

Reviewer 4: if we don’t “want” the users to update schedule/pipeline once documents have been written, i think we should just disallow that to be done at all. that said, don't want to block this docs update for now, so we can revisit and edit the docs when/if we actually make that change

    api_key="<api-key>",
    api_key_id="<api-key-id>"
)

data_client.enable_data_pipeline(id="<pipeline-id>")
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Go" %}}

Use [`DataClient.EnableDataPipeline`](https://pkg.go.dev/go.viam.com/rdk/app#DataClient.EnableDataPipeline) to enable a disabled data pipeline:

```go
client, err := utils.NewViamClient(context.Background(), utils.WithAPIKey("<api-key>", "<api-key-id>"))
if err != nil {
    panic(err)
}
defer client.Close()

dataClient := client.DataClient()

_, err := dataClient.EnableDataPipeline(context.Background(), &datapb.EnableDataPipelineRequest{
    Id: "<pipeline-id>",
})
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="TypeScript" %}}

Use [`dataClient.EnableDataPipeline`](/dev/reference/apis/data-client/#enabledatapipeline) to enable a disabled data pipeline:

```typescript
const apiKey = '<api-key>';
const apiKeyID = '<api-key-id>';

const client = await createViamClient({
  credential: {
    type: 'api-key',
    payload: { key: apiKey, keyId: apiKeyID }
  }
});

const dataClient = client.dataClient;

const pipeline = [

await dataClient.enableDataPipeline({ id: "<pipeline-id>" });
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### Disable a pipeline

> Disabling a data pipeline lets you pause data pipeline execution without fully deleting the pipeline configuration from your organization.

Reviewer 3: Maybe note that any time windows that pass while the pipeline is disabled will not contain data and will not be backfilled if the pipeline is enabled again

Author: Great point, added information about this.

```python
data_client = DataClient.from_api_key(
    api_key="<api-key>",
    api_key_id="<api-key-id>"
)

data_client.disable_data_pipeline(id="<pipeline-id>")
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Go" %}}

Use [`DataClient.DisableDataPipeline`](https://pkg.go.dev/go.viam.com/rdk/app#DataClient.DisableDataPipeline) to disable a data pipeline:

```go
client, err := utils.NewViamClient(context.Background(), utils.WithAPIKey("<api-key>", "<api-key-id>"))
if err != nil {
    panic(err)
}
defer client.Close()

dataClient := client.DataClient()

_, err := dataClient.DisableDataPipeline(context.Background(), &datapb.DisableDataPipelineRequest{
    Id: "<pipeline-id>",
})
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="TypeScript" %}}

Use [`dataClient.DisableDataPipeline`](/dev/reference/apis/data-client/#disabledatapipeline) to disable a data pipeline:

```typescript
const apiKey = "<api-key>";
const apiKeyID = "<api-key-id>";

const client = await createViamClient({
  credential: {
    type: "api-key",
    payload: { key: apiKey, keyId: apiKeyID },
  },
});

const dataClient = client.dataClient;

await dataClient.disableDataPipeline({ id: "<pipeline-id>" });
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

> ### Delete a pipeline

Reviewer 3: Deleting a pipeline will also delete its run history and the pipeline results collection

```go
client, err := utils.NewViamClient(context.Background(), utils.WithAPIKey("<api-key>", "<api-key-id>"))
if err != nil {
    panic(err)
}
defer client.Close()

dataClient := client.DataClient()

_, err := dataClient.DeleteDataPipeline(context.Background(), &datapb.DeleteDataPipelineRequest{
    Id: "<pipeline-id>",
})
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="TypeScript" %}}

Use [`dataClient.DeleteDataPipeline`](/dev/reference/apis/data-client/#deletedatapipeline) to delete a data pipeline:

```typescript
const apiKey = "<api-key>";
const apiKeyID = "<api-key-id>";

const client = await createViamClient({
  credential: {
    type: "api-key",
    payload: { key: apiKey, keyId: apiKeyID },
  },
});

const dataClient = client.dataClient;

await dataClient.deleteDataPipeline({ id: "<pipeline-id>" });
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### Check pipeline execution history

Data pipeline executions may have any of the following statuses:

- `SCHEDULED`: pending execution
- `STARTED`: currently processing
- `COMPLETED`: successfully finished
- `FAILED`: execution error

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Python" %}}

> Use [`DataClient.ListDataPipelineRuns`](/dev/reference/apis/data-client/#listdatapipelineruns) to view the statuses of past executions of a pipeline:

Reviewer 3: I wouldn't say past. A run might not be complete yet. Also like I mentioned elsewhere, shows more than status

});
```

To query your hot data store, set your query's `dataSource` field to `TabularDataSourceType.TABULAR_DATA_SOURCE_TYPE_HOT_STORAGE`.

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

To create a pipeline that reads data from the [hot data store](/data-ai/data/hot-data-store/), specify a `dataSourceType` in your pipeline configuration.

{{< alert title="Caution" color="caution" >}}

> Avoid specifying an `_id` value in your pipeline's final group stage unless you can guarantee its uniqueness across all pipeline runs.

Author: Sounds good. I updated the create example with the `$project` stage and added more information about this in the subsequent admonition. I'll keep an eye on Ask AI to see if this comes up at all.

### Disable a pipeline

Disabling a data pipeline lets you pause data pipeline execution without fully deleting the pipeline configuration from your organization.
The pipeline immediately stops aggregating data.
You can re-enable the pipeline at any time to resume execution.

> Viam won't backfill missed time windows from the period of time when a pipeline was disabled.

Author: That is what this line says. Are you suggesting I remove the contraction?
